Source Discussion Guide bell hooks: Black Vernacular: Architecture as Cultural Practice (https://womenwritingarchitecture.org/citation/black-vernacular-architecture-as-cultural-practice/)


bell hooks taught us to analyse the cultural labour of Black women who dared to challenge the universal claims of white cultural nationalism — Charles L. Davis II (https://raceandarchitecture.com/2022/09/06/essay-on-bell-hooks-in-the-architectural-review/)




The following is a discussion guide and informational support for thinking about the work of bell hooks in Black Vernacular: Architecture as Cultural Practice. The chapter is only seven short pages, and is accessible to read for free in pdf form here (https://uchi-arch.weebly.com/uploads/1/3/1/6/131600248/art_on_my_mind__visual_politics_-_bell_hooks-excerpts.pdf). An understanding of the hooks’ work is an invaluable tool in thinking about the future of a space, and recognizing the value of imagining a space that is better, and does better for more people.


A Chapter Summary (for if you don’t want to read the chapter, or if you’d like to know how I understood it)


Black Vernacular: Architecture as Cultural Practice is a chapter in bell hooks' book "Art on My Mind: Visual Politics". The chapter focuses mainly on the connection between architecture, space, and Black cultural practices, particularly within her own lived experience. Personal anecdotes are really important in illustrating the ways that even under conditions of segregation and economic hardship, Black people in the United States have been able to express creativity and find beauty in their surroundings and structures. hooks argues that the ability to shape and control one's living space is a fundamental aspect of freedom, using vernacular architecture as a form of cultural expression that illustrates this concept.


hook’s chapter describes the importance of individual creativity and aesthetic engagement with space, even when limited by material resources.. This chapter is a story of how Black people, and more broadly, those in marginalized communities, have historically and continue to engage with architecture and space, the past and present strategies of resistance and physical forms of creative expression. hooks suggests that studying these practices is crucial for challenging dominant narratives that define Black experiences solely through the lens of oppression and victimhood. Documenting, theorizing, and enabling these experiences of imagining builds this resistance into physical space, and helps to build a world that does better.




The terms that appear a couple times, and what they might mean


1. Vernacular Architecture: Camilla Ghisleni, a writer for Arch Daily defines (https://www.archdaily.com/951667/what-is-vernacular-architecture) vernacular architecture in a broader academic architectural context as local constructions that use traditional building frameworks (in terms of materials, resources, or concepts) that originate within the area or community from which it is being built. This kind of architecture is deeply steeped in its local cultural and geographical context. Beyond this definition, vernacular architecture is understood by hooks using a quote from professor of architecture LaVerne Wells-Bowie as “the language of cultural expression” that “exemplifies how the physical environment reflects the uniqueness of a culture.” (page 149).


2. Space: hooks presents a nuanced understanding of space, recognizing both material and symbolic dimensions. She argues for the importance of understanding how different communities, particularly those marginalized and oppressed, interact with, shape, and perceive space, shedding light on the ways in which space can be a site of personal expression, cultural identity, and resistance.


3. Subjugated Knowledges: The excerpt emphasizes the importance of documenting and recognizing the knowledge and practices of marginalized groups, which are often overlooked and dismissed by hegemonic narratives, including the architectural knowledge and creativity embedded in vernacular architecture.


4. Cultural Genealogy of Resistance: This concept traces the stories of resistance among oppressed groups, tracking the evolution of struggles and strategies across time. The chapter uses this framework to connect past and present practices of vernacular architecture to systems of resistance. “Documentation of a cultural genealogy of resistance invites the making of theory that highlights the cultural practices which transform ways of looking and being in a manner that resists reinscription by prevailing structures of domination.” (page 151)


5. Aesthetic Interventions: How individuals subjugated to systems of oppression can assert their creativity and agency by making aesthetic choices in their living spaces. (page 146)


6. Poverty of Spirit or Imagination: It is often assumed that poverty inherently constricts one’s capabilities of creativity and imagination. hooks describes, however, that the “lack of material privilege need not be synonymous with poverty of spirit or imagination.” (page 150)




Questions for the thinking


What is an example of vernacular architecture from your story or the people around you? Were there aesthetic interventions that defied systems of oppression? 


How do these concepts apply beyond living spaces, and into public infrastructure?


Further Reading for the Reading, if you so wish!


Essay on bell hooks in The Architectural Review
https://raceandarchitecture.com/2022/09/06/essay-on-bell-hooks-in-the-architectural-review/


African American Vernacular Architecture (AAVA) — Mwanzaa Brown
https://www.mwanzaabrown.com/eb-or-aave


Black Aesthetics + Theory - Black Built Environment: race and architecture in America - LibGuides at Pratt Institute
https://libguides.pratt.edu/black-built-environment/aesthetics-theory